.. _gpu-platforms:

GPU APIs
========

.. questions::

   - q1
   - q2

.. objectives::

   - o1
   - o2

.. instructor-note::

   - X min teaching
   - X min exercises

GPUs in HPC
-----------

GPUs come together with software stacks or APIs that  work in conjunction with the hardware and give a standard way for the software to interact with the GPU hardware. They  are used by software developers to write code that can take advantage of the parallel processing power of the GPU, and they provide a standard way for software to interact with the GPU hardware. Typically, they provide access to low-level functionality, such as memory management, data transfer between the CPU and the GPU, and the scheduling and execution of parallel processing tasks on the GPU. They may also provide higher level functions and libraries optimized for specific HPC  workloads, like linear algebra or fast Fourier transforms. Finally, in order to facilitate the developers to optimize and write correct codes, debugging  and profiling tools are also included. 

*Nvidia*, *AMD*, and *Intel* are the major companies which design and produces GPUs for HPC providing each its own suit **CUDA**, **ROCm**, and respectively **OneAPI**. This way they can offer optimization, differentiation (offering unique features tailored to their devices), vendor lock-in, licensing, and royalty fees, which can result in better performance, profitability, and customer loyalty. 
There are also cross-platform APIs such **DirectCompute** (only for Windows operating system), **OpenCL**, and **SYCL**.


CUDA
~~~~~~
The CUDA API provides a comprehensive set of functions and tools for developing high-performance applications that run on NVIDIA GPUs. It consists of two main components: the CUDA Toolkit and the CUDA driver. The toolkit provides a set of libraries, compilers, and development tools for programming and optimizing CUDA applications, while the driver is responsible for communication between the host CPU and the GPU. CUDA is designed to work with programming languages such as C, C++, and Fortran.


ROCm
~~~~

* Drivers and runtimes, provided by the amdgpu kernel model and dev-libs/roct-thunk-interface and dev-libs/rocr-runtime.
* Programming models (OpenCL, HIP, OpenMP)
* Compilers and tools. 
* Libraries. Most libraries prefixed by roc and hip. All roc* packages are written in HIP and uses hipamd as backend, while hip* are simple wrappers.
* Deployment tools

OneAPI
~~~~~~


OpenCL
~~~~~~ 

.. keypoints::

   - k1
   - k2
